>> Sreenivasan: ON THIS EDITION
FOR SATURDAY SEPTEMBER 19:
THE UNITED STATES AND RUSSIA
HOLD TALKS OVER MILITARY
INVOLVEMENT IN THE SYRIAN CIVIL
WAR.
ALSO, FROM KENYA, TIME FOR
SCHOOL: A YOUNG MAN'S STRUGGLE
TO GET AN EDUCATION.
>> WHEN THE GOVERNMENT
INTRODUCED FREE PRIMARY SCHOOL,
IT WAS LIKE EVERY CHILD WANTED
TO JOIN SCHOOL.
>> Sreenivasan: AND, ALEX KATZ,
A PROLIFIC AMERICAN ARTIST STILL
AT WORK.
NEXT ON PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
FROM THE TISCH WNET STUDIOS AT
LINCOLN CENTER IN NEW YORK,
HARI SREENIVASAN.
>> Sreenivasan: GOOD EVENING.
THANKS FOR JOINING US.
THE UNITED STATES IS CALLING ON
RUSSIA TO DISCUSS A POLITICAL
SETTLEMENT TO THE FOUR-AND-HALF-
YEAR-OLD SYRIAN CIVIL WAR.
THE U.S. WANTS SYRIAN PRESIDENT
BASHAR AL-ASSAD TO BE REPLACED,
BUT RUSSIA SUPPORTS ASSAD,
RECENTLY BEGAN RE-ARMING HIS
TROOPS, AND DEPLOYING FIGHTER
JETS AND HELICOPTERS TO A SYRIAN
BASE YESTERDAY.
IN LONDON TODAY, AFTER
CONFERRING WITH BRITAIN'S
FOREIGN MINISTER, SECRETARY OF
STATE JOHN KERRY CALLED ON
RUSSIA AND IRAN AND ANY OTHER
COUNTRIES WITH INFLUENCE OVER
SYRIA TO PUSH FOR NEGOTIATIONS.
>> WE'RE PREPARED TO NEGOTIATE,
IS ASSAD PREPARED TO NEGOTIATE?
REALLY NEGOTIATE?
IS RUSSIA PREPARED TO BRING HIM
TO THE TABLE AND ACTUALLY FIND
THE SOLUTION TO THIS VIOLENCE?
>> Sreenivasan: BECAUSE THE U.S.
ALSO HAS A MILITARY PRESENCE IN
THE REGION, THE U.S. AND RUSSIAN
DEFENSE SECRETARIES HAVE BEGUN
TALKING TO AVOID A DIRECT
CONFLICT BETWEEN U.S. AND
RUSSIAN FORCES.
FOR A YEAR, THE U.S. HAS
LAUNCHED AIRSTRIKES ON ISLAMIC
STATE, OR ISIS, MILITANTS INSIDE
SYRIA."
NEW YORK TIMES" CORRESPONDENT
MICHAEL GORDON IS TRAVELING WITH
SECRETARY KERRY.
HE JOINS ME NOW VIA SKYPE, FROM
LONDON.
THERE'S BEEN AN ESCALATION OF
MILITARY ACTIVITY FROM RUSSIA
INTO SYRIA.
WHAT DOES THE U.S. PLAN TO DO
ABOUT IT?
>> WELL, BASICALLY, THE UNITED
STATES TRIED TO STOP IT.
ABOUT TWO WEEKS AGO, THE
RUSSIANS BEGAN FLOWING EQUIPMENT
TO AN AIRBASE SOUTH OF LATVIA.
AND INITIALLY THE AMERICANS
DIDN'T KNOW WHAT WAS GOING ON.
BUT THEY'VE DEPLOYED HOUSING
NOW, THEY'VE DEPLOYED MORE THAN
200 MARINES TO PROTECT THE BASE,
SOME TANKS, SOME ARTILLERY, SOME
ARMORED PERSONNEL CARRIES.
NOW THEY HAVE AIR DEFENSE AND
SEVERAL AIRCRAFT ARMED WITH
AIR-TO-AIR MISSILES.
AND THE HOPE INITIALLY WAS TO
STOP IT, AND THE OBAMA
ADMINISTRATION TRIED TO GET
STATES IN THE REGION TO CLOSE
THEIR AIR SPACE, BUT IRAQ DIDN'T
GO ALONG, AND THE RUSSIANS ARE
THERE, AND NOW THEY
ARE TRYING TO MAKE THE BEST OF
IT.
>> Sreenivasan: THE RUSSIANS
SAY THESE ARE PRIMARILY
DEFENSIVE POSITIONS OR POSTURES,
RIGHT?
>> WELL, THE RUSSIANS ARE
DEPLOYING SYSTEMS TO SYRIA WITH
AN EYE TOWARD, THEY SAY,
FIGHTING THE ISLAMIC STATE.
SO, YES, THEY'VE DEPLOYED FORCE
PROTECTION AROUND THIS BASE, BUT
THEY'RE GOING THERE, OSTENSIBLY,
TO HELP THE ASSAD REGIME FIGHT
THE ISLAMIC STATE MILITANTS.
SO IT'S NOT A PURELY DEFENSIVE
CONFIGURATION.
AND THE CONCERN THAT THE
AMERICANS HAVE IS SINCE THEY
COULDN'T STOP THEM FROM GETTING
THERE AND THE RUSSIAN IGNORED
THEIR WARNINGS, HOW DO YOU
DECONFLICT SO THE RUSSIAN
AIRCRAFT AND THE AMERICAN-LED
AIR CAMPAIGN AGAINST THE ISLAMIC
STATE DON'T BUMP INTO EACH OTHER
AND YOU DON'T HAVE AN INCIDENT.
>> Sreenivasan: SO THAT MEANS
THERE'S GOING TO HAVE TO BE
COORDINATION ON FIGURING OUT
WHEN THERE ARE PERHAPS RUSSIAN
BOOTS ON THE GROUND AND WHEN
THERE ARE AMERICAN DRONES FLYING
OVERHEAD, MAYBE GOING AFTER THE
SAME ISIL TARGETS.
>> THE AMERICANS HAVE WAR PLANES
OVERHEAD, NOT JUST DRONES.
AND NOT ONLY THE AMERICANS NOW.
THERE ARE ARAB NATIONS INVOLVED,
TURKEY AIR FORCE IS INVOLVE, THE
BRITS HAVE A DRONE, THE FRENCH
MAY JOIN IN.
SO YOU HAVE AIRCRAFT THAT ARE
OPERATING, AND NOT JUST DRONES,
OVER SYRIA, CARRYING OUT AIR
STRIKES, AND YOU ARE-- THESE ARE
NOT REALLY RUSSIAN BOOTS ON THE
GROUND.
THESE ARE RUSSIAN-- PRESUMABLY
IT'S GOING TO BE RUSSIAN
AIRPOWER.
IT HASN'T TAKEN ANY ACTION YET.
AND THEY WILL HAVE TO DECONFLICT
SO THEY DON'T GET IN EACH
OTHER'S WAY AND DON'T HAVE AN
INCIDENT.
THE AMERICAN CONCERN GOES WELL
BEYOND THAT.
THEY'RE WORRIED THAT THERE'S A
HIDDEN RUSSIAN AGENDA HERE--
PERHAPS NOT SO HIDDEN-- THAT THE
RUSSIANS MAY BE THERE TO PROP UP
BASHAR AL-ASSAD, AND KEEP HIM IN
POWER, AT LEAST FOR A DURATION,
AND THAT THE RUSSIANS MAY ALSO
BE THIS IN THE EVENT THAT ASSAD
IS OVERTHROWN THEY WANT TO
INFLUENCE AND HELP DETERMINE
WHAT THE NEW LEADERSHIP OF THE
COUNTRY LOOKS LIKE.
>> Sreenivasan: AND KEEPING
ASSAD IN POWER IS STILL IN
DIRECT OPPOSITION TO WHAT THE
OBAMA ADMINISTRATION WANTS,
RIGHT?
>> YES.
BUT THE OBAMA ADMINISTRATION
HASN'T DONE VERY MUCH TO GET
ASSAD OUT OF POWER.
ALL OF THE AIR STRIKES IN SYRIA
ARE NOT AIMED AT ANY OF ASSAD'S
FORCES.
THEY'RE AIMED AT THE ISLAMIC
STATE, AND, INDEED, THE
PENTAGON'S TRAINING PROGRAM THAT
HAS FAILED SO MISERABLY, ONE
REASON IT FAILED IS THE REBELS
WHO ARE BEING RECRUITED WERE
BEING TOLD THEY COULDN'T FIGHT
THE ASSAD REGIME.
THEY WERE THERE ONLY TO FIGHT
THE ISLAMIC STATE.
WELL, SURPRISE, SURPRISE, NOT A
LOT OF SYRIANS WANTED TO JOIN
FOR THAT REASON ALONE.
>> Sreenivasan: ALL RIGHT,
MICHAEL GORDON OF THE "NEW YORK
TIMES" JOINING US HAVE A SKYPE
FROM LONDON TODAY.
THANKS SO MUCH.
>> OKAY, THANK YOU.
>> Sreenivasan: THE SYRIAN CIVIL
WAR HAS CAUSED FOUR MILLION
PEOPLE TO FLEE FOR NEIGHBORING
LEBANON, JORDAN, AND TURKEY, AND
INCREASINGLY FOR EUROPE.
NOW, MORE EUROPEAN COUNTRIES ARE
TIGHTENING BORDERS.
CROATIA AND SLOVENIA, WHICH
BORDER HUNGARY AND AUSTRIA, ARE
NOW AT THE CENTER OF A REFUGEE
LOGJAM.
CROATIA HAS SEEN 20,000 MIGRANTS
AND REFUGEES ARRIVE IN THE PAST
FEW DAYS, WITH MANY CONTINUING
ONTO SLOVENIA TO GET TO AUSTRIA
AND WESTERN EUROPE.
BUT TODAY, SLOVENIA SUSPENDED
TRAINS FROM CROATIA TO SLOW THE
ARRIVALS.
LAST NIGHT, SLOVENIAN POLICE
USED PEPPER SPRAY TO STOP
MIGRANTS AT ITS BORDER WITH
CROATIA.
TURKEY'S COAST GUARD TODAY
RESCUED TWO HUNDRED SYRIAN
REFUGEES IN THE AEGEAN SEA.
THEY WERE AIMING FOR GREECE,
WHILE ITALIAN SHIPS RESCUED
4,000 MIGRANTS FROM LIBYA ABOARD
FISHING BOATS AND RUBBER RAFTS.
470,000 REFUGEES HAVE CROSSED
THE AEGEAN AND MEDITERRANEAN
SEAS THIS YEAR.
2,800 HAVE DIED TRYING.
EUROPEAN LEADERS MEET AGAIN ON
WEDNESDAY IN BRUSSELS TO DEBATE
HOW TO HANDLE ASYLUM SEEKERS
ACROSS THE CONTINENT.
JAPAN IS REVERSING 70 YEARS OF
MILITARY RESTRAINT BY CLEARING
THE WAY FOR TROOP DEPLOYMENTS
OVERSEAS.
TODAY, THE JAPANESE PARLIAMENT
APPROVED A CONTROVERSIAL POLICY
TO ALLOW ITS MILITARY TO DEFEND
ALLIES IN OTHER NATIONS, EVEN
WHEN JAPAN IS NOT UNDER ATTACK.
PRIME MINISTER SHINZO ABE, WHO
PUSHED FOR THE POLICY, CALLS
THIS "COLLECTIVE SELF-DEFENSE."
JAPAN'S CONSTITUTION, ADOPTED
AFTER LOSING WORLD WAR TWO,
PROHIBITED SENDING TROOPS
ABROAD.
OPPONENTS CALL THE NEW POLICY"
UNCONSTITUTIONAL."
THE U.S. ARMY IS POISED TO HAVE
ITS FIRST OPENLY GAY CIVILIAN
LEADER.
PRESIDENT OBAMA HAS NOMINATED
LONGTIME PENTAGON OFFICIAL ERIK
FANNING TO BE THE NEXT ARMY
SECRETARY.
FANNING IS CURRENTLY THE ARMY
UNDERSECRETARY, THE NUMBER TWO
JOB, AND PREVIOUSLY SERVED IN
LEADERSHIP ROLES IN THE NAVY AND
AIR FORCE.
FANNING, WHO FACES SENATE
CONFIRMATION, WOULD BE THE
NATION'S FIRST OPENLY GAY LEADER
OF ANY MILITARY BRANCH.
PRESIDENT OBAMA ENDED THE
MILITARY'S BAN ON OPENLY GAY AND
LESBIAN SERVICE MEMBERS IN 2011.
>> Sreenivasan: IN THE YEAR
2000, THE UNITED NATIONS SET A
GOAL: IN 15 YEARS, EVERY CHILD
IN EVERY NATION SHOULD BE ABLE
TO OBTAIN FREE BASIC EDUCATION.
AT THE TIME, 100 MILLION
CHILDREN OF PRIMARY SCHOOL AGE
WORLDWIDE WERE OUT OF SCHOOL.
TODAY, THAT NUMBER HAS FALLEN BY
ALMOST HALF, TO 57 MILLION.
ONE COUNTRY THAT SIGNIFICANTLY
INCREASED THE NUMBER OF CHILDREN
GOING TO SCHOOL IS KENYA, WHERE
86% OF KIDS 11-YEARS-OLD AND
UNDER ARE NOW ENROLLED.
SINCE 2003, PBS HAS FOLLOWED THE
TRIUMPHS AND STRUGGLES OF
CHILDREN FROM DIFFERENT
COUNTRIES AS THEY BEGIN SCHOOL.
ITS PART OF THE DOCUMENTARY
SERIES "TIME FOR SCHOOL."
TONIGHT, WE CONTINUE THAT SERIES
IN THE FIRST OF SIX REPORTS--
PART ONE, THE STORY OF JOAB FROM
KENYA.
>> I THINK IF I GO TO SCHOOL,
AND GOD HELPS ME, I'LL BECOME A
PILOT OR A MECHANICAL ENGINEER.
>> Reporter: JOAB ONYANDO'S
FAMILY COULD NEVER AFFORD
TUITION FOR SCHOOL, UNTIL 2003,
WHEN KENYA MAKES PRIMARY SCHOOL
FREE FOR THE FIRST TIME IN
NEARLY THIRTY YEARS.
>> GOOD MORNING, SCHOOL.
>> GOOD MORNING!
>> Reporter: MORE THAN A MILLION
NEW STUDENTS FLOOD THE SYSTEM.
JOAB IS 10 AND HIS BROTHER
GERALD IS SEVEN WHEN THEY BEGIN
FIRST GRADE, WALKING TO SCHOOL
EACH DAY THROUGH THE SPRAWLING
NAIROBI SLUM THEY CALL HOME,
KIBERA.
♪ ♪
THEIR CLASS HAS 74 STUDENTS, AND
ONE TEACHER.
>> Reporter: FREE EDUCATION
ISN'T ENTIRELY FREE.
LIKE SO MANY OTHERS FROM KIBERA,
JOAB'S FAMILY STRUGGLES TO PAY
FOR SCHOOL UNIFORMS, BOOKS, EVEN
PENCILS.
HIS FATHER, ALFRED, IS
CHRONICALLY UNEMPLOYED, WHILE
HIS MOTHER, LEAH TAKES CARE OF
THE CHILDREN.
JUST HAVING ENOUGH TO EAT IS
ALWAYS A PROBLEM.
>> THE WAY I SEE IT, IF HE GOES
TO SCHOOL, HIS LIFE WILL IMPROVE
TREMENDOUSLY, AND HE'LL BE ABLE
TO GET ME OUT OF THIS MISERY, SO
I ALWAYS ENCOURAGE HIM TO READ
AND LEARN.
>> Reporter: BUT SHORTLY AFTER
JOAB BEGINS SCHOOL, HE'S HIT
WITH A TERRIBLE BLOW.
>> THE LAST TIME I SAW HER, THAT
DAY IN THE MORNING SHE WAS FINE.
>> Reporter: HIS MOTHER DIES AT
THE AGE OF 28.
>> Reporter: UNCONFIRMED RUMORS
THAT HIS MOTHER DIED OF AIDS ARE
ENOUGH FOR JOAB AND HIS SIBLINGS
TO BE OSTRACIZED BY THEIR
NEIGHBORS.
>> Reporter: JOAB RUNS AWAY FROM
HOME.
JOAB BECOMES ONE OF NAIROBI'S
60,000 STREET CHILDREN.
>> Reporter: TEACHER LEAH ASEGO
SENDS SOME OF JOAB'S CLASSMATES
TO FIND HIM.
>> Reporter: NOW IN FOURTH GRADE
AT AGE 12, JOAB IS DOING WELL
WITH HIS STUDIES AND IS NAMED
CLASS MONITOR.
>> Reporter: BY THE TIME JOAB IS
15, HIS FATHER REMARRIES AND
MOVES OUT.
JOAB HONORS HIS MOTHER'S WISH
THAT HE LOOK AFTER HIS BROTHER
AND SISTER.
>> Reporter: JOAB IS NOW HEAD OF
THE HOUSEHOLD, AND MUST FIND A
WAY TO FEED THE FAMILY.
A SCHOOL PROGRAM PROVIDES FRESH
VEGETABLES AND OTHER STAPLES
MEANT ONLY FOR THE CHILDREN.
BUT THE FREE FOOD ATTRACTS A
VISITOR: THEIR FATHER.
>> Reporter: DESPITE THE
HARDSHIP, JOAB STAYS IN SCHOOL.
MRS. ASEGO KEEPS CLOSE TRACK OF
HIM, INVOLVING HIM IN POETRY
PERFORMANCE COMPETITIONS TO KEEP
HIM MOTIVATED.
JOAB GRADUATES EIGHTH GRADE IN
THE TOP THIRD OF HIS CLASS.
HE GETS A SCHOLARSHIP TO A
STRICT BOARDING SCHOOL CALLED
NAKEEL.
BECAUSE HE STARTED SCHOOL SO
LATE, HE'S AN INDEPENDENT-MINDED
18-YEAR OLD, ENTERING NINTH
GRADE.
AND THAT'S NOT AN EASY
TRANSITION.
>> HERE IN SCHOOL THERE ARE
RULES AND REGULATIONS.
>> Reporter: JOAB BEGINS FINDING
EXCUSES TO GO HOME TO KIBERA,
UNTIL ONE DAY HE JUST DOESN'T
COME BACK.
>> Reporter: HIS GRANDMOTHER
FINDS HIM LIVING ON THE STREETS
AGAIN.
SHE TAKES HIM TO HER VILLAGE IN
WESTERN KENYA.
JOAB SURVIVES AS A SUBSISTENCE
FARMER, OUT OF SCHOOL, FOR THE
NEXT TWO YEARS.
HIS EDUCATION HAS REACHED A DEAD
END.
BUT HIS BROTHER GERALD, WHO
STARTED PRIMARY SCHOOL THE SAME
DAY AS JOAB, NOT ONLY STAYS IN
SCHOOL BUT EXCELS.
THE LITTLE BOY JOAB TOOK CARE OF
AFTER THEIR FATHER LEFT THEM IS
NOW 19 YEARS OLD AND CLASS
PRESIDENT.
>> Reporter: GERALD'S FUTURE
DEPENDS ON NATIONAL EXAMS.
IF HE DOES WELL, HE COULD GO TO
COLLEGE.
A FUTURE THAT NOW SEEMS OUT OF
REACH FOR JOAB.
>> Reporter: JOAB ASKS OUR FILM
CREW FOR A RIDE TO NAIROBI,
WHERE HE HOPES TO FIND A JOB OR
SOME TRAINING.
KIBERA HAS CHANGED LITTLE SINCE
HE LEFT TWO YEARS AGO.
IF ANYTHING, IT'S MORE CROWDED
AND DESPERATE.
WITHOUT INTERVENTION, IT SEEMS
UNLIKELY JOAB, NOW 21 YEARS OLD,
WILL FIND HIS WAY BACK TO
SCHOOL.
>> Reporter: BUT JOAB GETS
ANOTHER CHANCE.
WITH THE HELP OF HIS FORMER
TEACHER AT NAKEEL BOARDING
SCHOOL AND AMERICAN SPONSORS,
JOAB IS ACCEPTED TO A DAY SCHOOL
OUTSIDE NAIROBI, FAR AWAY FROM
KIBERA.
>> ON PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND
SUNDAY, "TIME FOR SCHOOL"
CONTINUES FROM BRAZIL WITH THE
STORY OF JEFFERSON.
>> MY FUTURE IS NOT GUARANTEED.
BUT THE ONLY WAY TO GUARANTEE MY
FUTURE IS BY GOING TO SCHOOL.
>> Sreenivasan: ON THE NEXT
PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
>> Sreenivasan: ONE OF THE MOST
PROMINENT AND PROLIFIC AMERICAN
ARTISTS OF THE PAST 50 YEARS IS
ALEX KATZ.
KATZ IS A NEW YORK-BORN-AND-BRED
PAINTER WHO SPENDS HIS SUMMERS
IN MAINE AND FINDS A LOT OF HIS
INSPIRATION THERE.
BEST KNOWN FOR HIS BRIGHT,
BILLBOARD-SIZED PORTRAITS,
KATZ'S WORK HAS BEEN THE SUBJECT
OF TWO MUSEUM RETROSPECTIVES
THIS YEAR.
AND, AS THE NEWSHOUR'S PHIL
HIRSCHKORN REPORTS, KATZ IS AS
BUSY AS EVER.
>> Reporter: EVEN AT 88-YEARS-
OLD, ALEX KATZ PAINTS ALMOST
EVERY DAY.
>> I LIKE DOING IT.
YOU NEVER KNOW WHAT'S GOING TO
HAPPEN WHEN YOU START ON A
CANVAS.
I LOVE THE ADVENTURE.
AND I LOVE STICKING IT TO PEOPLE
WHO DIDN'T THINK I WAS ANYTHING
FOR SO MANY YEARS.
>> Reporter: STARTING OUT, KATZ
THOUGHT HE COULD BE NEVER A
FULL-TIME PAINTER WITHOUT A
PART-TIME JOB.
WHEN I SAT DOWN WITH HIM OUTSIDE
HIS SUMMER STUDIO IN
LINCONVILLE, MAINE, HE TOLD ME
HIS FIRST GALLERY SHOWS DIDN'T
SELL MUCH.
>> I HAD FIVE FLOPS IN A ROW.
>> Reporter: AND NOW, YOU'RE IN
MUSEUMS ALL OVER THE WORLD.
>> YEAH.
I'M RIGHT NEAR THE TOP OF THE
PYRAMID AT THIS POINT.
>> Reporter: THIS SUMMER'S
RETROSPECTIVE AT ATLANTA'S HIGH
MUSEUM FEATURED CLASSIC KATZ.
GROUP PORTRAITS
BRIGHT COLORS.
CLEAN LINES.
AND HIS MAIN SUBJECT OF RECENT
YEARS: LANDSCAPES.
HIS INSPIRATION COMES FROM
OBSERVATION.
LIKE A WALLFLOWER, PAINTING
FAMILY AND FRIENDS AND OTHER
PEOPLE HE MEETS.
>> YEAH, I'VE ASKED WAITERS,
WAITRESSES TO POSE.
YOU KNOW, THEY THINK I'M COMING
ON.
AND SOMEONE TELLS THEM, "OH NO.
HE'S A REALLY GOOD PAINTER."
>> Reporter: HIS FAVORITE
SUBJECT ACROSS THE DECADES HAS
BEEN HIS WIFE, ADA, PAINTING HER
MORE THAN 250 TIMES.
>> ADA'S LIKE A PERFECT MODEL.
PICASSO WOULD HAVE JUMPED AT
HER.
HER MEASUREMENTS WAS MISS
AMERICA.
ADA LITERALLY STOPPED THE
TRAFFIC THE FIRST TIME SHE CAME
IN A BATHING SUIT.
SHE USED TO-- SHE GOES ON A
BEACH, GUYS FALL OVER.
>> Reporter: THE COLBY COLLEGE
MUSEUM, IN MAINE, HOUSES THE
LARGEST KATZ COLLECTION
ANYWHERE: 850 WORKS.
COLBY NOW HAS AN EXHIBIT
FOCUSING ON KATZ'S EARLY WORK,
FROM THE 1950s.
DIANA TUITTE IS THE CURATOR.
>> I THINK THAT WHAT ALEX SEEMED
TO KNOW COMING OUT OF ART SCHOOL
WAS THAT HE DIDN'T WANT TO BE
DOING WHAT ANYONE ELSE WAS
DOING.
INITIALLY, KATZ PAINTED FROM
PHOTOGRAPHS-- LIKE THESE FIGURES
IN A FIELD, OR THESE FOUR
CHILDREN.
THEN, WHILE TAKING ART CLASSES
IN MAINE, KATZ SAYS, HE FOUND
HIS EYES.
>> I LIKE THE LIGHT.
THE FURTHER NORTH YOU GET, THE
LESS WHITE LIGHT YOU HAVE AND
THE MORE COLOR.
AND I THOUGHT THE COLOR AROUND
HERE, YOU KNOW, IS JUST REALLY
MARVELOUS.
AND THAT WAS A BIG REASON FOR
COMING HERE.
>> Reporter: HE'S COME BACK TO
COASTAL MAINE FOR THE PAST 61
SUMMERS.
HE BUILT A STUDIO OVERLOOKING A
POND AND OFTEN FINDS SUBJECT
MATTER RIGHT OUTSIDE THE WINDOW.
WHEN KATZ HAS AN IDEA, HE FIRST
DRAWS A SKETCH AND THEN PAINTS A
SMALL STUDY.
WHEN HE RETURNS TO MANHATTAN IN
SEPTEMBER, KATZ TRANSFORMS THE
STUDIES INTO A LARGE CANVASS.
SO THIS... BECOMES THIS.
KATZ WORKS FAST, APPLYING
DIFFERENT COLORS AND LAYERS OF
WET PAINT ON TOP OF EACH OTHER.
I WATCHED HIM COMPLETE THIS 15-
FOOT-BY-11-FOOT PAINTING OF
TREES IN JUST 90 MINUTES.
HE HAS REALLY TRANSCENDED ANY
ART MOVEMENT AND CONTINUES TO
REALLY BE INFLUENTIAL FOR YOUNG
PAINTERS TODAY.
>> WHAT'S HAPPENING NOW IS THAT
IT'S LIKE AN EXPLOSION OF
DIFFERENT PEOPLE ARE INTERESTED
IN MY WORK THAN WERE, LIKE, TEN
YEARS AGO.
>> Reporter: WHY DO YOU THINK
THAT IS?
>> I THINK LONGEVITY IS PART OF
IT.
AND I THINK THE BIG CHANGE FROM
THE ABSOLUTISM OF MODERN ART TO
THE OPEN AREA WE ARE IN NOW.
I FIT.
I THINK IN A SENSE THE WORLD
CAUGHT UP WITH ME.
>> Reporter: MOST PEOPLE YOUR
AGE SLOW DOWN.
>> WELL, I AIN'T MOST PEOPLE.
AM I?
>> Sreenivasan: HEAR MORE FROM
ARTIST ALEX KATZ AND SEE MORE OF
HIS WORK.
VISIT US ONLINE AT
pbs.org/newshour.
>>THIS IS PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND,
SATURDAY.
>> Sreenivasan: EVEN TEN YEARS
LATER, THE HURRICANE SEASON OF
2005 IS UNFORGETTABLE.
FIRST, IN AUGUST, HURRICANE
KATRINA HIT THE LOUISIANA AND
MISSISSIPPI GULF COAST.
THEN IN SEPTEMBER, AN EVEN
STRONGER STORM MADE LANDFALL:
HURRICANE RITA.
CHARLIE WHINHAM, FROM LOUISIANA
PUBLIC BROADCASTING, REPORTS
FROM CAMERON PARISH IN
SOUTHWESTERN LOUISIANA WITH THIS
LOOK BACK.
>> Reporter: NOW WHILE KATRINA
GARNERED ALL OF THE HEADLINES
AND FOR VERY GOOD REASON,
HURRICANE RITA DID ITS DAMAGE AS
WELL, CAUSING $12 BILLION WORTH
OF DAMAGE.
AND FOLKS AROUND THIS PART OF
THE COUNTRY CONSIDER HURRICANE
RITA AS "THE FORGOTTEN STORM."
MANY COASTAL COMMUNITIES WERE
SIMPLY WASHED AWAY.
FORTUNATELY, NO ONE IN CAMERON
PARISH DIED.
RITA WAS THE FOURTH STRONGEST
ATLANTIC HURRICANE ON RECORD.
KATRINA RANKED SIXTH.
BUT KATRINA HIT A LARGER
POPULATED AREA KILLING AN
ESTIMATED 1,836 PEOPLE ACROSS
THE GULF COAST AND CAUSING
$108 BILLION IN DAMAGES.
IN TEXAS, RITA PROMPTED THE
LARGEST EVACUATION IN U.S.
HISTORY.
THE COMBINATION OF SEVERE
GRIDLOCK AND EXCESSIVE HEAT LED
TO 107 EVACUATION-RELATED
FATALITIES, ACCORDING TO THE
HOUSTON CHRONICLE.
TEN YEARS AFTER RITA, THERE
REMAINS SIGNS OF HOPE AND
PROGRESS.
SOUTH CAMERON HIGH SCHOOL RE-
OPENED IN 2010.
THE NEW SCHOOL IS 19 FEET ABOVE
GROUND, BUILT TO WITHSTAND
HURRICANE FORCE WINDS AND
FLOODING.
IN 2006, THE SOUTH CAMERON
MEMORIAL HOSPITAL RECEIVED A TWO
MILLION DOLLAR GRANT FROM THE
BUSH-CLINTON KATRINA FUND.
IT IS ONE OF THE MANY FINANCIAL
PIECES OF THE PUZZLE TO KEEP
THIS PLACE OPEN.
THERE IS ALSO RENEWED HOPE THAT
JOBS FROM THE OIL AND GAS
INDUSTRY WILL RETURN.
CAMERON PARISH BOASTS A PAIR OF
MULTI-BILLION DOLLAR
CONSTRUCTION PROJECTS SET TO
OPEN OVER THE NEXT THREE YEARS.
>> Sreenivasan: AND FINALLY,
POPE FRANCIS HAS LANDED-- IN
CUBA.
THE POPE VISITS THE
PREDOMINANTLY CATHOLIC ISLAND
FOR THREE DAYS UNTIL COMING TO
WASHINGTON, NEW YORK, AND
PHILADELPHIA NEXT WEEK.
ALSO THIS WEEKEND, WE'RE
EXPERIMENTING ON SNAPCHAT.
FOLLOW US @PBSNEWS.
I'M HARI SREENIVASAN.
HAVE A GOOD NIGHT.